Much of your study time will be
devoted to rehearsal and repetition
of the information and skills
that you need to remember.
In this video I intend providing you with
some suggestions as to how to do this well.
G'day, and welcome to
Crystal Clear Mathematics
where it IS easier than you think!
I'm your host, Graeme Henderson.
Broadly speaking, there are two kinds
of things stored in long term memory -
facts and skills.
Facts are stored in what
researchers describe as declarative memory
and they require conscious processing
in the frontal lobe of the brain.
Once facts (the what and the why)
have been introduced to your long term memory,
they are retained best if you can engage in
what is called 'elaborative rehearsal' of them.
This means that each time you think
of these things,
you try to make more connections between them
and other things that you already know.
You do this by doing extra reading,
solving extra problems,
discussing them with other people
and being creative and analytical
in the way that you think about the facts.
For example, if you wish to remember
Pythagoras' Theorem better,
you could find a book or two in the local
library that had something to say about it,
or go searching the Internet
for something interesting,
or find a different textbook
or past exam papers
or a puzzle book
with different kinds of questions in it,
or chat with your teacher or tutor about other
ways of understanding or using the theorem,
or you could use it
to do something interesting
like erect a bridge over a creek
or build a tower or some such thing.
Be creative but safe and have fun.
This, by the way,
is where 'nerds' get up to mischief.
You should be trying to develop new ways
of looking at the same information
and new ways of analyzing
the same situations.
I actually like reading history and finding out
how mathematics was used throughout history.
This helps me learn about its connection
with art and hygiene and food
and discovery and explosives and medicine
and so on - I think you get the idea.
If you've found some interesting insights
about any mathematical topic,
feel free to share them
on our FaceBook page
or in the comments section
below this video.
Suggestions are always welcome!
The second part of the puzzle
is how to deal with skills.
Now, skills are stored in what
researchers call procedural memory.
This is where you remember how to do
things that require a set of automatic steps.
These include motor skills like walking,
kicking balls, or swimming,
or gymnastics, et cetera.
When you see Olympic divers dive
from the ten metre tower,
they're using procedural memory.
They practise each skill
until it can be done efficiently
and almost without conscious thought.
Some researchers describe this
as moving skills from being reflective
(that is, requiring thought)
to reflexive
(that is, NOT requiring conscious thought).
All skills are perfected by rote rehearsal.
That means lots of practice.
A large part of all mathematical skills
should be stored in procedural memory,
in other words,
you need to practise them
until you can do them accurately
and efficiently and speedily.
Believe it or not, for a good mathematician,
there is very little conscious effort
in solving a relatively complex
linear equation involving fractions,
because the skill has been practiced
and practised and refined.
The key here is the same one that will apply
to any skill that you want to master -
it's not simply practice
that makes perfect,
all that practice really does
is make things permanent!
The more accurate saying is that
PERFECT practice makes things perfect.
And so said Vince Lombardi,
a very famous United States football coach!
In other words, whenever and wherever
and whatever you're practising,
try to do it properly and well
without taking shortcuts
or being sloppy about it.
In mathematics, this means
practicing setting your work out
properly each time.
Here are some rather practical suggestions
about how to practice
and rehearse your skills well.
First of all, learn what is perfect first
and practise that.
Avoid practicing things
you don't fully understand.
All you're likely to do is succeed
in making bad habits permanent
and then they're very hard to change.
You should therefore listen
very carefully in class
and learn to set your work out clearly
and in distinct steps (or procedures).
In other words,
learn things properly in the first place.
Correcting bad habits is difficult
and it's demoralising.
Secondly, learn from an expert
rather than on your own,
unless you're very good at mathematics.
This is why I don't agree with
students' learning their own method
for solving arithmetic problems
until they've been taught first
to master a useful algorithm.
They're then free to explore
all kinds of other options.
Unfortunately, many students
learn bad habits without guidance.
It is a bit like asking someone
to learn to snow ski
by going up the chair lift
for the very first time
and 'working it out'
on the way down the slope.
It is much, much better
to receive instruction
and to learn your good habits early.
The third thing is to remember that
you need to understand
(that is, have sense and meaning)
and be motivated
(that is, have value and relevance)
in order to learn well.
And, if you truly understand your work
you should be able to analyse new situations
to see how to apply your current knowledge
and should be able to analyse your work
to see where you could improve upon it.
I hope these suggestions help you become
more aware of how you learn
and help you plan your study accordingly.
If you would like to read more about
how to learn mathematics let me recommend
"How the Brain Learns Mathematics"
by David Sousa.
You might ask your school librarian
to obtain a copy for the library -
purchase it from Amazon
or The Book Depository for example.
The beginning of the book discusses
the results of recent research
into how the brain learns mathematics.
And the remainder of the book discusses
how teachers can use this information
to better prepare lessons and to help students
of different ages learn better.
We have now concluded
our three discussions about memory.
In my next video I will share about
six attitudes worth cultivating
in order to improve
the effectiveness of your study time.
This is Graeme Henderson encouraging you
to become familiar with your memory
and encouraging you to learn how to learn.
Please subscribe, like or comment
on this video.
Thank you.